So we mentioned the term browser
formatting context multiple times.
So let's understand what is that.
So we mentioned that you have
an elements and some kind of a realm.
So, when the element falls into
this realm, the rules are applied,
and the rules can be pretty random.
So we can say, okay,
if the element falls into the realm, then,
for instance, the element should
take 100% of the parent width,
and it also should be
rendered from top to bottom.
So we basically replicated
the block formatting context.
But can we slightly
complicate this example and
say create a formatting context
within the formatting context?
And apparently, we can do that.
So, we can create a new
formatting context,
then place the element 2, and
we assume that the rules are the same, and
the element will take the 100%
of the parent container width.
But the key difference here that
the inner formatting context
is completely isolated from
the outer formatting context.
Once element enters the realm, so
it cannot be impacted by any
other rules of outer context.
We can also complicate this example by
creating a new type formatting context,
which we can call inline
formatting context.
So, and I'm gonna repeat the word for
mining context multiple times now.
So, the element 3 may enter
the context and we can say, okay,
when the element enters the inline
formatting context, it should be rendered
from left to right, and it should take
the width of the content it contains.
And since the element 3
doesn't span full width, so
when the element 4 appears in the context,
so they render in a row as a string.
>> Evgenii: So, what are the key
ideas of the formatting context?
The first one is isolation, so elements
within the context are shielded from
the rules of the external context,
it's also the scalability.
The CSS spec developers,
when they want to introduce a new
rule set that apply to elements,
they create a new context, and the most
known one is like flex or the grid.
And it's also the predictability.
So when you have a strict set of rules,
you always know the position of
the element and the placement.
So it's time to become a browser and
try to render the following HTML
page going line by line and
creating the formatting
context like the browser does.
So, we start with the HTML.
So HTML tag, when you initiate the page,
always creates a new formatting context.
But when we render the body tag,
since body doesn't have any special
properties assigned to that.
So, the body just enters the formatting
context, but it doesn't create a new one.
So, same applies to the heading, and
same applies to an ordered list.
But when it comes to the list element, you
see that we applied display inline block.
So, when the element has explicit
property set for the style for display.
This means that this instructs the browser
that we need to create a new formatting
context.
In this case, inline block is the special
case of the block formatting context,
so there is no inline
block formatting context.
So we initiated this new
formatting context and
every element placed now within that will
be rendered as an inline block item.
And the same applies
to the next list item,
to the paragraph three and paragraph four.
So, now we render this section.
So when we render this section, we see
that there is a display flex applied.
This means that the flex
formatting context is used, so
every item becomes the flex item.
But one thing now we have
the span element, and
remember we discussed that span
creates the inline formatting context.
So whatever thing that is placed inside
the span becomes inline content, so
we created in a new inline
formatting context.
So, this is how browser constructs
the different type of contexts, and
how the elements are rendered.
>> Speaker 2: So, can you clarify the
context set by the HTML tags themselves or
does it have more to do with this CSS?
Cuz you could overwrite the default
behavior of some of these tags with
CSS, right?
>> Evgenii: So, when you initiate the HTML
page, so it always sets the block
formatting context by default,
this is the default behavior.
But I think you can override this if
you set the style to HTML element.
So if you reset the flex, then there's
smell we'll have to become the flex for
mining context.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, so
it's more about the CSS?
>> Evgenii: Yeah.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, the tags just
give you the defaults, got it.